We're all familiar with the sound of a
car passing by.
This distinctive drop in pitch is known
as the Doppler effect, and we notice it
most with sounds, but it also affects
light in the exact same way. If light
moved slow enough, we would also see the
car change color as it passed us by. The
reality is light moves far too fast for
us to notice anything like this, but
take a look at this image of galaxy
GSZ13.
It should look something like this, but
its color has been changed all the way
to red. In fact, the light from this
galaxy has been changed so much that it
isn't even visible to the human eye.
This is the Doppler effect in action, or
for light, it's known as redshift.
Although it may not look like much, this
tiny red blob is the most distant thing
anyone has ever seen. With this picture,
we are looking back 13.6 billion years
into the past, when the universe was
only 2% of its current age. But the
galaxy itself is over 33 billion
light-years away. How does this make
sense? We know that a light-year is the
distance light travels in a year. So, if
it took the light 13 billion years to
reach us, it should be 13 billion
light-years away. Well, it's not quite
as simple as that. In the time that
light has spent traveling towards us,
space itself has been constantly
expanding, and the galaxy has been
moving further away from us. Because of
this, the galaxy in 2023 is now over 33
billion light-years away, but it's light
from 13 billion light-years away has
only just reached us. But how could we
possibly measure this distance? There
are two kinds of redshift, Doppler
redshift and cosmological redshift. In
the Doppler scenario, the galaxy is
moving through space, but with
cosmological redshift, the galaxy is
both moving and stationary at the the
time. But why is the galaxy moving in
the first place? But, remember that this
galaxy has gone from 13 billion
light-years to over 33 billion
light-years away. A distance only
possible if it was going considerably
faster than the speed of light.
Understanding how this happened is
pretty complicated. If we look at an
unbaked cookie, we have a random
scattering of chocolate chips, which we
can think of as galaxies. When the
cookie gets baked, the dough expands and
the chips end up further away from each
other. But, it's not that the chips have
moved relative to the dough, but the
dough in between the chips has expanded,
just like our universe. The galaxies in
our universe can't move through space
faster than the speed of light, but
there is no limit to how fast the
universe can expand. This means that the
light currently being emitted from this
galaxy will never reach us, since the
expansion of the universe at this
distance is outracing the speed of
light.